

As ‘classical liberals’ with a solid understanding of economics and how economic freedom/privatization leads to social harmony, we should see the Israeli/Palestinian conflict as not only something to solve in order to prevent the coming WWIII and related tyranny/suffering, but also as a tremendous opportunity to spread our free-market ideas and thus unimaginable socioeconomic prosperity.

Somewhat shockingly, as things currently stand, there does not seem to exist a brief and clearly defined solution to this conflict based on simple free-market principles, much less a solution that is both easy to understand, relatively just, and (with a little econ education) in the best interest of all.
The intellectual giants upon which our understanding of the world stands, men like Ludwig von Mises, 1974 Nobel Laureate in Economics F.A. Hayek, and polymath Henry Hazlitt, not only explained the socioeconomic order and provided the blueprint for solving our problems by stressing the monumental importance of economic education, they also provided the building blocks needed to solve this civilization-ending crisis. Prior to men like Darwin who helped us understand the emergence of the biological order, and then the aforementioned men who helped us understand the socioeconomic one, mankind was pretty much lost in a world of mysticism where things worked or failed based on whatever our cultural values defined as “good” or “evil”. But eventually certain monumental ideas coalesced in the minds of these and like-minded men which helped us overcome the massive ignorance and intellectual errors that kept us in relative misery and mysticism. One of the most vital lessons these men provided was to focus, not on ill intent or moral failings, but on “intellectual error”/ignorance. Hayek tells us:

>“When I stressed that is genuine intellectual error that we have to fight, what I meant to bring out is that we ought to remain aware that our opponents are often high-minded idealists whose harmful teachings are inspired by very noble ideals. It seems to me that the worst mistake a fighter for our ideals can make is to ascribe to our opponents dishonest or immoral aims.”

And Mises nails it even better when he writes in a section aptly titled “The Fight Against Error” of his great book “Human Action” :

>“The problems involved are purely intellectual and must be dealt with as such. It is disastrous to shift them to the moral sphere and to dispose of supporters of opposite ideologies by calling them villains. It is vain to insist that what we are aiming at is good and what our adversaries want is bad. The question to be solved is precisely what is to be considered as good and what as bad. The rigid dogmatism peculiar to religious groups and to Marxism results only in irreconcilable conflict. It condemns beforehand all dissenters as evildoers, it calls into question their good faith, it asks them to surrender unconditionally. No social cooperation is possible where such an attitude prevails.”

Although these men were focused on economics, the core of their wisdom applies to the Israeli/Palestinian conflict as well. We MUST not get into the “moral sphere” by just blaming one side ‘Palestinians/Islamic world’ or the ‘Israelis/Jews’ regardless of how horrific some of the things some do/say/etc. We must focus on that complex sequence of thoughts and circumstances intertwined with a human nature we all share to get to the real causes of the problems and have mutual sympathy, understanding, and just as importantly, a workable solution whose benefits can easily be grasped and be brief enough to be easy to explain and thus somewhat viral. Unfortunately most of what goes on is “good vs. evil”, ‘administering “justice” ’ which means one side is the ‘good guys’ and the other the ‘bad guys’, etc. thus “It condemns beforehand all dissenters as evildoers, it calls into question their good faith, it asks them to surrender unconditionally. No social cooperation is possible where such an attitude prevails.” Quite understandably the Palestinians and a large part of the non-Jewish-(and especially many Jews)-world are all about “Justice”, about painting the Israelis/Jews as some racist conquerors who constantly undermine international law, etc. Yes, there are some who clearly fit this label, yet these types are abhorrent even to the Anti Defamation League.

Unfortunately this “Justice”/moralist approach is simply not going to work, it will only keep leading to the polarization we are seeing and the continued engulfing of the entire planet into this conflict, causing more pressure/sparks until WWIII starts which seems like it could happen any minute now. The rate at which sparks are going off in Syria, with the latest being the shooting down of a Russian spy plane leading to the deaths of 15 crew-members and the Russians thoroughly convinced that it was due to Israeli intent or at least significant negligence, basically guarantees that a civilization-ending disaster will occur relatively soon. Anyone who has a cursory understanding of how WWI and WWII and other major disasters got started should have little doubt that with the dice being rolled so often it is only a matter of time, a very short time.
Israelis/Jews can easily point to all the horrible things many say about Jews, the old ‘pound of flesh’-type antisemitism of more religious days in the past, the conspiratorial accusations of being the masterminds or plotters behind Capitalism and also Socialism/Communism and countless hateful statements by Islamic clerics/leaders etc. How they see the world and the actions they take seem very understandable from their perspective. The short clip below by famed American Black leader Louis Farrakhan gives and example of the errors/dangers Jews understandably feel they must work against.

The Palestinians and Islamic world too can easily point to the racist/ethnocentrism/‘religious fanaticism’ of many Jews, the British Empire-type racism which all white Europeans (including many leading Zionist Jews obviously) had towards the non-European world and so much more to make their case.
This is a 2 video playlist featuring one of the leading Israeli and Zionist historians Benny Morris. He does a wonderful job of showing a narrative that is much more sympathetic to the more mainstream Israeli perspective and is packed with truth/wisdom.

The below is part I of a similar talk but this time given by Ilan Pappe showing a perspective that is far more critical of the Zionist/Israeli view which rightly brings attention to British Imperialist-type racism which was also a factor in our current troubles.

A complete understanding of this mess requires not only much history but also an evolutionary look at how religions emerge and how their growth/spread is intertwined with the evolution of Capitalism/‘the market process’. One classic example relates to the spread and evolution of modern banking/finance. For example, banking/finance motivates many people to save and via banks/financiers/intermediaries lend that saved wealth to entrepreneurs who can then consume such wealth as they build/create big projects which would have been impossible to carry out if they were limited to the savings of just a few friends/relatives. If the interest rate is at say 10%, people with no desire to go into business or have relatively unprofitable ideas are motivated to earn interest by saving, and borrowers who have superior ideas can borrow the saved wealth in order to consume it as it sustains their creations/businesses and can then pay back the loans with interest. This mechanism which motivates the accumulation of wealth/savings and pairs them with superior minds to enable big projects provides a monumental computational boost to the societies that stumble upon it and allow it, and in many ways helps explain why the European social order accelerated in progress during the last 1,000 years while the Islamic one remained less prosperous. The Islamic world has traditionally had strong prohibitions on charging interest so it inadvertently loses the aforementioned banking/finance benefits. For many centuries the Catholic Church too had strong prohibitions against charging interest which inadvertently provided “selective pressure” or incentives for Jews to be over-represented in banking/finance which was a great benefit to the European social order even though it brought Jews some real scorn/antisemitism due to massive economic ignorance. Historian Paul Johnson writes referring to the early 1900s :
“One-third of the Paris bankers were Jews, and it was a favourite assertion on the left that Jews controlled government finance whoever was in power. ‘Their long association with banking and commerce’, said Jean Jaures, ‘has made them peculiarly adept in ways of capitalist criminality.” (Johnson, 1988, p. 458)
See the “capitalist criminality” nonsense. The mixture of economic ignorance and Jewish influence/success, which on a naïve and superficial level made enough sense to lure many Germans, can be seen in Hitler’s speeches like this excerpt shows from a speech given in Munich on July 28th, 1922:
“The vast process of the industrialization of the peoples meant the confluence of great masses of workmen in the towns. Thus great hordes of people arose, and these, more’s the pity, were not properly dealt with by those whose moral duty it was to concern themselves for their welfare. Parallel with this was a gradual ‘moneyfication’ of the whole of the nation’s labor-strength. ‘Share-capital’ was in the ascendant, and thus bit by bit the Stock Exchange came to control the whole national economy. The directors of these institutions were, and are without exception, Jews. I say ‘without exception,’ for the few non-Jews who had a share in them are in the last resort nothing but screens, shop-window Christians, whom one needs in order, for the sake of the masses, to keep up the appearance that these institutions were after all founded as a natural outcome of the needs and the economic life of all peoples alike, and were not, as was the fact, institutions which correspond only with the essential characteristics of the Jewish people and are the outcome of those characteristics.”
One can only speculate as to what exactly Hitler meant with each of these sentences, but parts like “were not properly dealt with by those whose moral duty it was to concern themselves for their welfare” seems to imply the usual whining of the public/politicians about how we need some sort of government provided safety-net as the social order gets more complex. The statement “‘Share-capital’ was in the ascendant, and thus bit by bit the Stock Exchange came to control the whole national economy” would be true and increasingly so as the benefits of stock exchanges increased economic calculation and productivity. Unfortunately as the rest of the excerpt seems to imply, due to Hitler’s massive economic ignorance he did not see stock markets as “as a natural outcome of the needs and the economic life of all peoples alike” and associated them with some Jewish tool to benefit themselves at the expense of others. How much of this sort of talk Hitler himself really believed I don’t know but many Germans obviously bought into it. The bottom line is that not only is massive economic ignorance at the root of most of our current socioeconomic problems, it is also the biggest factor leading to the current Israeli/Palestinian disaster. And our old intellectual tools of “good vs. evil” , “the bad guys”, or in the case of Jews who have their own quasi-mystical word/concept of “antisemitic”, is just leading to polarization and inevitable disaster.
So without further ado let us propose the following as a simple starting point. If it sounds a little far-fetched at times, please just read the whole thing, only 6 mins long:
A single country/state with a largely NON-Democratic government where everyone has equal rights. The government should be minimal in the sense that it should be clearly defined in some bare-bones constitution* that besides modern/obvious freedoms like freedom of press/speech/etc., the national government should only be involved in protecting such freedoms and private property, and should clearly be forbidden from ever going into education, elderly care, any kind of socialized medicine, etc. This is NOT up to democratic change and is important so that Jews will not fear a larger Muslim population eventually taking their freedoms away, or their wealth, which would definitely be the case if they were forced to pay for massive public sector welfare-state-bureaucracies attempting to provide equal access to education, health services, elderly care, etc. that the economically-ignorant-though-well-intentioned-public always falls for. We free-marketeers know that democracy “is nothing more than mob rule, where fifty-one percent of the people may take away the rights of the other forty-nine.” — Jefferson. We are well aware of how due to economic ignorance people just continue to vote for central planning and eventually “planned chaos”. Our great Jewish hero Ludwig von Mises reminds us:
Democracy guarantees a system of government in accordance with the wishes and plans of the majority. But it cannot prevent majorities from falling victim to erroneous ideas and from adopting inappropriate policies which not only fail to realize the ends aimed at but result in disaster. Majorities too may err and destroy our civilization.
We definitely do not want what is happening in South Africa, where economic ignorance, exacerbated by ill treatment in the past, has a now-minority of whites suffering increasingly and an accelerated wrecking of the economy.
Jews and Muslims and Christians, etc. will have the obvious freedom to pool their wealth to create their own privately funded educational systems/charities and be free to discriminate if they so wish based on religion, sex, whatever their customs or free individuals agree upon.
Palestinians who were expelled during various wars and their descendants will obviously have the right to go back to the lands they were expelled from. If the lands have since been developed a simple starting solution to the potential conflicts and a way to provide some restitution to the Palestinians and help get this country on a rapid path to amazing prosperity is as follows:
Jews keep all lands and homes and buildings they currently have developed and are clearly being used for productive purposes, even the settlements in the West Bank. My guess is that this actual amount of land is probably around 20 percent of the land. Then we take the other 80 percent, and using some simple software we distribute it to all Palestinians who were dispossessed thus privatizing most of the country.
So far this simple framework accomplishes the following:
Jews should be pretty happy, no fear of a demographic majority that can then interfere with your freedom and/or property, no need to pay for the education of non-Jews or other Jews for that matter. The more religious Jews who have a super strong connection to the land can live,travel, buy land everywhere. No draconian uprooting or potentially economically devastating disruptions.
Palestinians regain their freedom and land.
Since this minimal state will have minimal/no taxes or regulations it will quickly blossom in prosperity. The land will quickly increase in value, providing much deserved compensation for the Palestinians. The entire country will skyrocket in socioeconomic prosperity and serve as an example/beacon of progress. Two-state solutions are based on old hatreds/ideologies and are insulting to humanity and what we are capable of and should expect for the future.
Loudly clamoring for a solution along these lines brings us free-marketeers tremendous advantages. We will be the only ones actually making noise and bringing attention to a rather simple-and-thus-easy-to-spread viral plan. It gives us an opportunity to teach and sort of piggyback basic economics as we explain to people how prosperity will skyrocket helping us in our more ambitious world-wide free-market educational efforts, which is obviously the key to everything. As things are right now, such a solution seems impossible, but with clever marketing we can succeed at spreading the necessary ideas. We simply have no choice, we wither make Misesians of everyone, or we blow ourselves up.
There are two simple economic concepts/nuggets our educational efforts should focus on which give us the biggest bang-for-the-buck, concepts which inadvertently already form the backbone of our relative success:
A basic understanding of inflation which is what the great Henry Hazlitt advised us to focus on. If there are 10 people in an island with $10 each for a total of $100, can anything sell for $150? No, right? Not enough money. What if each has $1 million? Then yes. So what is needed for general prices to rise? More money, who creates it? Government central banks. Easy to learn, teach, super powerful. The fact that most libertarians already know this is proof of its power/viralness and ability to get people to open up their minds to the rest of the free-market econogospel. Ron Paul didn’t “invent” or “design” the Ron Paul Revolution(s) of 2008/12. It was the viralness of a basic understanding of the aforementioned which played the key role and filled college campuses with young men chanting “End the FED”
A basic understanding of the vital role private property plays in enabling economic freedom and the knowledge/creating/sharing that follows via economic competition. Why are private sector companies like BMW and Honda constantly innovating and copying each other’s innovations thus spreading superior knowledge and restructuring the social order into more advanced states as fast as humanly possible? Because the institution of ‘private property’ gives everyone in their role as consumers the ‘freedom to trade’ their wealth for what they like best. This ‘economic freedom’ is what inadvertently “turns on” ‘economic competition’ which is what motivates and inevitably forces everyone/BMW/Honda in our role as producers to produce something society values (our labor/products/services) which we do by innovating or copying existing innovations, or just doing what we are asked by managers/entrepreneurs, or just doing what we are asked by managers/entrepreneurs. As cost-cutting ideas emerge leading prices to continuously fall, new profitable ideas arise and once again spread via competition in an endless cycle of knowledge generation/innovation,or just doing what we are asked by managers/entrepreneurs. As cost-cutting ideas emerge leading prices to continuously fall, new profitable ideas arise and once again spread via competition in an endless cycle of knowledge generation/innovation. For example, computers were once very expensive, but once the price of making them came down enough, people easily realized that every home could have them, which gave birth to our computerized world and the Internet and all the great things that flow from it. The more wealth is produced, the more wealth has to be offered in exchange for labor as entrepreneurs/companies compete against each other for the labor they need which helps explain why the economic pie grows for everyone. Freedom, as opposed to leading to chaos, inadvertently “turns on” ‘economic competition’ which turns the planet into a distributed supercomputer that is constantly innovating and spreading superior information and subsequent social order. Socialist/‘Public sector’ bureaucracies are MONOPOLIES that lack the incentives in the always-competing private sector orders. They get their wealth through taxation so they have no pressure to be efficient and/or copy innovations which helps explain why Socialist/Communist countries are always run-down/poorer, copying all their technology from the Capitalist world, and have police-states needed to keep everyone going along with the plans/ideology. Below are North and South Korea

